1
1
Living Digital Lives
Monday. The week begins. It’s 6.30am. You’ve been woken
by your phone’s alarm. You immediately reach for the device,
noticing there are WhatsApp messages waiting to be read. An
icon from Twitter is also alerting you to something, perhaps
a new follower. Your partner has been up for a while. In the
living room, Amazon’s Alexa has begun streaming some songs
from Spotify. You know you need to check email. Then check
your calendar to see what meetings you have scheduled in the
afternoon. You notice your ‘bedtime’ tablet, which you use to
watch Netflix, is flashing to be charged. “There’s something
wrong with the screen on the fridge,” your partner says. Time
to get up.
This start to the day won’t be exactly the same as yours. You’ll have
your own array of devices. You might not use Twitter. Maybe you
live on your own. And maybe you don’t (yet) have a screen on your
fridge. But for many of us today, regardless of how we go about
waking up, we soon start to connect and interact with digital devices
and services. In fact, according to a 2017 report by Deloitte, 16%
of Americans reach for their smartphone immediately after waking,
42% within five minutes, and 62% check for messages, email, social
media, and the news within 15 minutes.1
We lead digital lives. Twenty-six per cent of Americans report
being ‘almost constantly’ online.2
 Over 80% of people own a
smartphone, with the average person checking it about 50 times
a day.3
 A large proportion have it at hand at all times, even when
asleep.4
 We often check in during the night; a 2017 survey in the
UK found that 66% of teenagers wake to check their phone in 
2
SLOW COMPUTING
the early hours, with 35% of parents doing the same.5
 And even
if we do not own a smartphone, or use the internet infrequently,
we still interface with digitally mediated services all the time – at
work, moving through transport systems, using utilities, passing
surveillance cameras, and so on.
Is this just the way life is now? Should it be like this? Does it
matter at all?
In this book we make two related arguments. First, how we
interact with digital devices does matter. Digital technologies are
accelerating and fragmenting our everyday lives, and the data our
devices gather are used to profile and target us. Second, we should
step back, even if just a little, to try and seize some self-control.
Our call is not a Luddite one. We are not against computing and
the digital age. Rather, our call is for balance: for using today’s
computing power, but in a way that is managed, considered, and
to our benefit. ‘Slow computing’ is one possible way you can be
more careful about leading a digital life. But it is more than that.
Slow computing is also about seeking and making changes to how
our digital society and economy operate and are organized.
Slow computing is not an easy strategy, however. It is something
to work at, albeit in the face of numerous pressures. Many digital
technologies are designed to be seductive and addictive.6
 We’re
called upon, indeed often psychologically compelled, to check
notifications on our phones, to answer emails, reply to messages,
and see what’s happening on social media, or encouraged to just
jump lazily around from one app to another, perhaps casually
tapping at the screen as we move from Netflix to YouTube and then
Facebook. Devices draw us in: laptops desktops, tablets, phones,
TVs, and yes, even fridges, demand our attention. They seduce
us, making us willingly and voluntarily subscribe to and desire
their logic, trading any potential negative effect, such as a loss of
privacy or time fragmentation and stress, against perceived benefits
such as enjoyment, convenience, and cost. We’re also compelled
to use digital devices to complete mundane tasks: interfacing with
government; filing taxes; applying for a permit or benefits; filling
in forms to update an insurance policy; buying goods or services;
or looking for information such as a library’s opening hours.
Participating in everyday life, therefore, brings us into contact
with the digital world; and the experience of interacting with, and 
3
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
through, digital media often makes us want to do it more, even if
it works against our self-interest. Moreover, states and corporations
often have a lot of power to set and drive agendas; this means
resisting and pushing back can be daunting and involve energy we
might not always manage to spare. Against these pressures, slow
computing seeks to redirect attention, reclaiming time for other
pursuits, and to protect its practitioners from any pernicious effects
of living a digital life. It does this both personally, by providing tactics
for managing how you engage with a digitally mediated world, and
collectively by pooling knowledge, cooperatively acting together,
and mobilizing political power to shift public debate and influence
the regulation of questionable practices.
In this book we reveal why we need balanced digital lives. We
demonstrate why slow computing deserves our attention and detail
how we can individually and collectively make it achievable. We
make clear the issues at stake, set out slow computing thinking and
practices, and document the practical and political interventions
that we can undertake to reassert sovereignty over our digital lives.
Hopefully, the thesis we develop and the strategy outlined will
convince you to join the countless others who are already starting
to practise slow computing as an alternative means to experience
the joys of computing.
The joys of computing
The quality and power of today’s digital devices and services should
not be understated. Many of us hold in our hands extraordinary
equipment. On our smartphones we can communicate with
satellites to identify our location; download and watch movies when
we’re out and about; send photos to friends on the other side of the
world; make video calls; play games; attach other devices to measure
weights or temperatures, or take credit card payments; use default
apps such as a calculator, a calendar, a note-taker or an interactive
map; and download and use thousands of other apps for exercise,
cooking, reading, weather, travel, radio and podcasts, wellness
advice, and just about anything else you can think of. Computers are
generative technologies par excellence – they enable us to creatively
and flexibly produce all manner of designs, stories, and products in
ways that far exceed the capacities of previous tools. They provide 
4
SLOW COMPUTING
diverse forms of entertainment through a single device and allow
us to pursue multiple forms of communication, networking, and
consumption. They are truly remarkable devices.
Lots of us would be quite surprised (and distressed) if a device
stopped working. It would be unusual for the screen to break
without us having dropped it. Software programs do sometimes
crash these days, but a great many work like clockwork. Batteries
are not always replaceable but many last quite well, even if they do
seem to need charging every day. And as digital devices become ever
more robust, with powerful processors, lots of memory, and highdefinition screens, we use them to mediate and augment everyday
life: to produce, consume, interact, communicate, govern, police,
travel, and play. And we can do this while on the move – checking
a bank account, sending an email, watching live sport, or following
a recipe is becoming easier and quicker.
We are, in short, living in an age of unprecedented computing
power, with some indications that even people living in very remote
places or who belong to the world’s poorest communities will soon
have devices with regular, fast, and affordable internet connections.
In this sense, we are living at the start of the age of what some call
‘ubiquitous’ (computation available everywhere, via devices able to
connect to the internet) and ‘pervasive’ (computation embedded in
everything enabling them to be linked to the internet) computing.7
Such are the capacities and utility of digital technologies that they
have become the lifeblood of today’s information society and
economy, just as steam was at the start of the industrial age.8
 Digital
computation, like steam, is reshaping our world – from automating
manufacturing and service jobs, to making cashless payments,
optimizing the delivery of utilities, creating autonomous vehicles
and drones, monitoring personal health, sharing information and
viewpoints, and remotely controlling home appliances.
The speed, power, and stability of many of today’s devices and
services is something to celebrate. We certainly don’t want to go
back to an analogue world, and we doubt you do, either. For all we
might complain or worry about the way we now live with digital
devices and services, few of us want to return to the pre-digital
age. We enjoy our devices – we even find joy (not to mention love,
good times, friendships, work, and crucial information) in them.
To labour the point a little more here, just think of some of the 
5
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
other obvious conveniences or subtle helping hands provided by
today’s technologies:
• The train you took this morning had free Wi-Fi. It wasn’t
lightning fast but you were able to update your newspaper app
and pass the time.
• While at work, your employer emailed you a message to say this
month’s payslip is available for you to review. You saw you’ve
been refunded the expenses from that trip abroad last month.
Doing that took about 45 seconds.
• In your local supermarket you simply pick items, scan them,
place them in your bag, check out, and leave. No waiting in
line. No unpacking/repacking. You’re in and back out again in
less than five minutes.
• Your child’s school has sent a convenient reminder on Facebook
about next Friday’s theatre production.
• Your car’s GPS was updated over-the-air today and on the way
to a friend’s house it rerouted you to avoid a nasty traffic accident
near the church.
• At work or at home you’ve been able to simultaneously edit a
report with other contributors who are located in another office.
• The new office chair you ordered online yesterday has arrived.
It came at the same time as a new 256GB Micro SD card for
your camera, which lets you take and store thousands of photos.
• Using your phone, you follow the actions, thoughts, and
adventures of your friends, as well as keeping up to date with
breaking news on social media.
• You compare dozens of prices and book a hotel; then pay a
utility bill instantly from your armchair.
• Using a networked games machine, you play a multi-player
game in real-time with several friends who are all located in
different countries.
You’ll be familiar with all these features of everyday life, even if
the contexts or specifics are different. Like us, then, you probably
have to admit that there’s some joy to be had through networked
computation. In many ways, digital technologies do simplify things.
The weight of some everyday problems has been reduced. A sense
of convenience is created. Time and energy is seemingly saved. To 
6
SLOW COMPUTING
make it absolutely clear, there’s a lot to like about the way today’s
world of technology is taking shape.
Problems coming into focus
For all the joys of computing, however, it’s also true that collectively
as a society we are becoming aware of some major problems with
the way today’s digital technologies are configured, rolled out,
and utilized. Some of these problems are personal and some are
institutional and structural.
Lots of us feel tethered to and bogged down by devices. We feel
harried, rushed, and constantly pestered by messages arriving and
needing a response. We feel a compulsive need to check for updates,
to interact, or to continue playing a game. Indeed, we sometimes
seem to be addicted to digital life; in fact, we are addicted. We often
seem unable to function without having at least one device within
reach and giving the sensation that some form of salvation is only
a quick click away. Indeed, 31% of Americans feel anxious when
separated from their phone, with 60% experiencing occasional
stress when their phone is off or out of reach.9
 In just a few years,
it seems as if we have become beholden and tethered to digital
devices and systems.
This tethering is compounded by societal expectation from
family, friends, employers, clients, service providers, marketers,
and others who expect that we are always reachable, that we will
respond immediately, and that every part of our daily lives should be
mediated by computation and connectivity. Homes are becoming
ever more ‘smart’: televisions, washing machines, fridges, coffee
machines, heating systems, and a plethora of other devices, are now
connected to the internet and they actively try to learn and react to
our preferences and respond to our requests. Work requires using
ordinary computers, along with specialist devices, tailored software,
and interactions and transactions across the internet. Interfacing
with government requires filling in online forms and uploading
information. An industry like air travel requires us to interface
with digital computation at every stage: buying tickets, checking
in, passing through security and immigration controls, routing
baggage, and then flying in a plane that is reliant on millions of
lines of code to take to the skies.10 Indeed, such is the ubiquitous 
7
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
and pervasive extent of computing that it is now almost impossible
to live outside its orbit. We are compelled to be digital citizens,
whether we like it or not, almost regardless of whether we possess
sufficient digital literacy and skills.
A key point to begin emphasizing here is that, at every point
in these overlapping digital ecosystems, data are being generated,
extracted, and translated into value. Websites and apps monitor
what links we click on; large swathes of data concerning usage and
location are extracted through apps; and our faces, vehicle licence
plates, and the unique signatures of our devices (such as the MAC
[media access control] address which identifies each smartphone)
are scanned in public space and tracked. These streams constitute
what has been termed ‘big data’: that is, data which are continuously
produced in real-time, are exhaustive to a system (the data relate to
every person, object, transaction within a system11), and uniquely
identifiable at the individual level.12 At the same time, there are
technologies that collate and process these data to make inferences
and predictions about what kinds of people we are and then use
these insights to make all kinds of decisions about, and indeed for,
us. For example, some retailers adjust prices according to who they
think we are and what algorithms suggest we can afford to pay.
They try to nudge us into making purchases we were not initially
intending. Some platforms fire annoying, but sometimes also
knowing, ads at us; some ads are even produced by political ‘bots’
looking to sway our opinions, often in unaccountable ways. Data
brokers use the profiles to help companies make important lifechanging decisions about whether we might be a suitable employee
or tenant, or are sufficiently low-risk to loan money to, or who
might be a suitable date for us. Extracted data are then employed to
construct personal profiles that are then used to socially sort people
into various categories, who are then treated differently.13 Our data
are being monetized and their value extracted, and used to reshape
how states govern society. Our life chances are now mediated by
forms of algorithmic governance, and in some cases life-or-death
decisions can be made about us, sometimes autonomously and based
on inaccurate data, such as by diagnostic healthcare technologies
or killer drones.14
Consequently, how we understand and experience privacy is
changing. Privacy is a condition that many people value and it is 
8
SLOW COMPUTING
considered a basic human right in most jurisdictions, enshrined in
national and supra-national laws in various ways. In the pre-digital
age, citizens in western democratic countries expected a high degree
of privacy – to be able to selectively reveal themselves to the world
within accepted limits (such as the state’s right to know certain
information). The production of big data, however, challenges
privacy rights because of the extensive, invasive, and granular
nature of data extraction, and how the data are used for purposes
for which they were not generated.15 Big data and associated data
analytics and machine learning also multiply the extent to which
unacceptable practices and privacy harms – such as interrogation,
identification, secondary use, exclusion, breach of confidentiality,
disclosure, exposure, blackmail, appropriation, distortion, intrusion,
decisional interference – can occur,16 as well as creating new forms
of predictive privacy harms through inferencing.17 In other words,
the proliferation of networked digital devices has fundamentally
changed the privacy landscape and the extent to which citizens
can expect to selectively reveal themselves. New legislation,
such as the General Data Protection Regulations (GDPR) in the
European Union (EU), are attempts to more effectually reassert
privacy rights, though their effectiveness in this endeavour has yet
to be fully assessed.
A multibillion dollar, global industry, the data brokerage firms
that extract value from big data are now a central, if largely hidden,
part of everyday life. As is the games industry, the sharing economy,
digitally mediated retail, software development, apps and operating
systems, web design, hardware manufacture, networking and
telecommunications, and so on. We live in the age of what some
initially termed the ‘information economy’18 and more recently
‘surveillance capitalism’19 or ‘platform capitalism’.20 Networked
computation is underpinning and driving economic development,
how the global economy is organized and functions, and how
value is produced, extracted, and reinvested (even in long-standing
traditional industries, such as manufacturing, logistics, agriculture,
media, and tourism). In turn, the largest firms producing many of
the digital goods and services we use are accumulating enormous
profits, with huge market capitalizations created in a very short
space of time. Google, Facebook, Uber, Alibaba, Amazon, Apple,
and hundreds of others, are all young companies that have struck 
9
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
gold by disrupting old industries and creating new products and
markets, quickly becoming globe-spanning enterprises. In turn,
these companies wield enormous economic power and also exercise
political power, lobbying governments and kicking back against
regulations that might limit how they produce value and their ability
to expand further. And yet, their wealth is often generated in large
part through our data and labour, and infringing on our rights and
expectations concerning privacy and data use.
Of course, it is not simply companies that seek to collate and
extract value from data. Government at all levels (local, national,
supra-national) generate and process data for the purposes of public
administration, managing operations, and policing and security. In
part, this is to ensure that citizens comply with laws and regulations
(attending school, paying taxes, obeying traffic rules), but also
receive their entitlements (to services, welfare, housing, health, and
so on). More and more interactions with the state are conducted
online, with citizens directly interfacing with government services
and databases. Analytics are applied to these databases to identify
potential welfare cheats and reduce fraud. Such systems also work
to monitor the performance of government itself, with data used to
assess the efficiency and effectiveness of programmes and policies,
and to design new ways of delivering services. On a darker note,
as the revelations of Wikileaks, Edward Snowden, and other
whistleblowers have demonstrated, there also has been a stepchange in the extent and nature of state-led surveillance in many
nations (for example, the various programmes of the US National
Security Agency [NSA] and UK Government Communications
Headquarters [GCHQ], and many police forces). As well as parsing
government data to assess potential security and criminal threats,
these agencies are also drawing on commercial data to monitor the
views (via social media, email, messaging, phone conversations),
associations (via social networks), activities, and locations of
populations.
What this all means is that, in living our digital lives, we can be
exposed to some worrying practices. Even if your, or our, exposure
might not always seem so bad, we are often unaware of the extent
to which we constitute the product from which value is being
leveraged, or how we are being negatively affected in overt and
covert ways, or how others might be more profoundly affected. 
10
SLOW COMPUTING
Among university researchers, media critics, political commentators,
and many business experts, there is a growing call for a better
understanding of these emerging problems. In academic journal
articles, scholarly books, newspaper or magazine exposés, and all
manner of podcasts, concern is raised about the effects of digital
life; about the ways in which disruption of established industries or
government practices is not always a good thing; about how entire
technical systems might discriminate against or disadvantage certain
populations; or how new platform economies can destabilize labour
markets and create more precarious work. Indeed, there have been
sustained calls for more investment in establishing ethical guidelines
for machine learning and artificial intelligence, regulating data
privacy and security, enacting data justice, and for instituting new
labour laws, among others.
We think one way to cut through and make sense of all of the
criticisms and alarms is to suggest that digital life is creating worrying
problems along two principal axes. On the first axis, the issue is what
we’ll refer to as ‘acceleration’: a sense that, for all the convenience
of digital technologies, they also cut into our lives in ways that
increase the pressure to always do more, always remain connected,
always stay on alert, leaving us struggling – at times, really struggling
– to switch off, relax, and not re-connect. Emailing eats into our
holidays; sending messages on WhatsApp disturbs our family time;
devices beep and ping when we’re eating out; completing everyday
tasks means going online, jumping between websites, clicking here
and then there in a rush, with a sense of urgency and almost panic
because we know it shouldn’t take long but the internet’s slow for
some reason and we need to run for a bus, but this online form
has an error and we can’t submit it and … and … pressure builds.
Digital life seems to compress and fragment our time.
If acceleration is on one axis, we think ‘extraction’ needs to be
on the other. As we have noted, as digital life has emerged it has
become reliant on a business model that opportunistically mines
data about all aspects of our lives, including our tastes, ideas, and
thoughts. We enjoy the fact that many digital services and apps
are free to use. They are not free to create and run, however, and
it’s impossible to cover costs or make a profit with no income. So
we have become the product, as well as the consumer and user,
and in the case of some platforms the producer (for example, we 
11
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
create the content that is consumed on social media). In this sense,
there is an exchange of data and labour for a service.21 Even so, this
exchange can be lopsided, and the implications not entirely clear
and transparent to the user. The exchange can lead to billions of
dollars of profits flowing to the companies that make the most of
these opportunities. And what this relationship means for all of
us is still not at all clear. To repeat, it is us who produce the data,
become the targets of tracking and surveillance taking place behind
the scenes, and us who are worked on by algorithms and analytics
designed to game us in some way, often autonomously and in many
ways without regulation or oversight. We’re caught up in a data grab.
When we take stock of acceleration and extraction, therefore,
we’re struck by the way individual users – you, us – are in the centre
of things with serious pressures bearing down from two directions.
But we also know that individuals can choose, to varying degrees,
how they act in response to acceleration and extraction, and can
also work with others to counter these pressures. It is precisely this
sense of acceleration and extraction inviting a response that we
explore in this book. We’re convinced everyone can and probably
should work to find a balanced digital life; that the joy of computing
exposes us all to acceleration and extraction, but also that we have
options to establish new digital selves. The way we respond now
and in the future is the core issue.
Slow computing
Slow computing is a way to characterize a type of response to
digital life that prioritizes your needs and interests, as well as the
public good for society as a whole. The term was introduced by
Nathan Schneider in 2015 in a short article in New Republic.
22 He
used it to refer to using a computer that has been self-configured
with open source software. In a related article in America magazine
he describes slow computing thus:
What I mean by this is making choices about using
computers, and the networks they connect to, with
more awareness of how they affect ourselves and
others around us. Much as the Slow Food movement
emphasizes local economies, traditional knowledge and 
12
SLOW COMPUTING
ecology, Slow Computing means not merely opting
for the most competitive, profit-driven hardware and
software, but instead building a commons. It means
cultivating digital lives that reflect our analog values.23
Schneider explicitly links slow computing to the slow living
movement. Since the mid-1980s, this movement has been growing,
with the ideas and values of ‘slowness’ being applied to different
facets of everyday life and work.24 So we can find people calling
for and practising ‘slow living’ in general,25 ‘slow food’,26 ‘slow
scholarship’,27 ‘slow urbanism’,28 ‘slow tourism’,29 and so on.
We share Schneider’s desire to couple digital life with the ideas
and ideals of the slow living movement. For us, slow computing
is a suite of aims and a set of principles designed to transform
how, on the one hand, we engage and manage computation in all
aspects of our lives (for example, home, work, leisure), and how, on
the other, society collectively responds and sets the framework in
which computation takes place. As we discuss in detail in Chapter
6, at its heart is an ethics of digital care – of self-care and of care
for others. We have chosen to link this ethics of digital care to the
notion of slowness, because the wider slow living movement is
principally about pushing back against the stresses and pressures that
seem to be multiplying across everyday life. It is about seeking an
alternative path to the speed and busyness of the modern world that
prioritizes a different set of values – enjoyment, patience, individual
and collective wellbeing, sovereignty, authenticity, responsibility,
and sustainability.
The slow movement is about more than managing time and
speed. It is also about experience, quality, and a set of expectations
and principles. For example, the slow food movement seeks a more
leisurely approach to preparing and eating food, but also desires
better ingredients and food stuffs (for example, organic, sustainably
farmed), more tasty recipes, and a more enjoyable dining ambience,
as well as promoting a healthy living lifestyle and opposing the values
and economy of fast food. Slowness is about taking a more measured
pace, but it is also about enacting a different kind of society, one
that is more reflective and tries to create a better quality of life. In
this sense, slow computing is about practising politics with a small
‘p’ (living your life with respect to some aims and principles), but 
13
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
also in a big ‘P’ sense (actively and openly promoting and debating
those principles and how they should be enacted), with respect to
the effects of computation and data on society and economy.
As such, there is a general underlying philosophy to the idea,
one that has a built-in ethics of care to oneself, to each other, and
to the planet. It’s not simply a matter of changing pace, but also
changing perspectives about what matters and then trying to enact
a more sustainable, enjoyable, and fulfilling lifestyle. In contrast
to Facebook’s original motto, ‘Move fast and break things’, slow
computing therefore embraces Ruha Benjamin’s counter-motto of
‘move slower and empower people’.30 For us, slowness when applied
to digital lives is about countering acceleration and extraction.
It is about creating a more productive relationship with digital
technologies; about using devices and apps without feeling harassed,
stressed, coerced, or exploited.
The term ‘slow computing’, then, seeks to capture the diverse
actions of a wide range of people who are aiming to moderate,
oppose, evade, alter, or otherwise navigate their way around problems
such as acceleration and extraction, and other issues encountered
when living digital lives. Following our twofold division of the
key harms, these resistances take the form of slowing down and
temporally reconfiguring digital participation and performing
intricate ‘dances’ around and within the proliferating platforms and
constituent units and infrastructures of data extraction. Neither of
these moves is problem-free, with both practices posing difficulties
for technology users. Nevertheless, slow computing is a viable and
necessary option if you want to interface with computing on your
terms.
The axes of acceleration and extraction mean that digital life
is coming toward you at a rapid pace and in ways that can seem
like you’re losing control. How can you respond? It is important
to recognize that you already have some scope – and possibly
more if you connect with others effectively – to counter the
pressures bearing down on you.31 In the first place, we will argue
that responding does mean taking individual ownership of and
responsibility for the issues. You are the one feeling time- and
work-stressed from always interfacing with computation; your
choices about what data to share are at issue.
14
SLOW COMPUTING
That’s not to deny that some of this pressure is asserted by others,
such as employers, or that some data are extracted whether we
like it or not. To be sure, we are bound up in structural conditions
and relationships that place limits on our agency and our ability to
resist the ways in which digital technologies impact on our lives.
For example, governments can compel us to engage with them
through digital systems, employers can insist that we are always
connected and responsive, and family and friends can pressure us
to use particular platforms and services. Different groups also have
varying levels of autonomy and capacities to exert control over
their digital lives. Those with insecure jobs can be more tightly
bound to a digital leash, people of colour and ethnic minorities
are more likely to be profiled and targeted in negative ways, and
poor and marginalized communities are less likely to possess the
tools and skills to practise slow computing. Others possess the social
standing and resources to live digital lives that are more under their
command.
Nevertheless, we are all active agents in our own lives; we have
some ability – even if to a limited degree – to shape relationships,
counter prevailing conditions, and make decisions about how to
act. There are steps we can all take, many of them minor, that
enable us to take back some control and autonomy. Some of these
steps will give rise to inconveniences, irritations, hurdles; a few are
difficult. But in many cases it’s simply about learning new practices,
including new ‘click-ways’ (that is, you need to click here, then
there, then choose this option, then that one, and as you click
your way through options you start to practise slow computing),
or learning when you simply need to stop clicking and just ‘switch
off smart’ (that is, not just switching off digital devices but doing
so in a way that lets others know why you’re not responding). As
you read the following chapters you might recognize some of the
slow computing tactics we detail and realize you have already been
practising them without necessarily thinking of them in these terms.
While we think individual responses are a crucial element of
slow computing, there is no doubt that collective moves are also
needed. Some of these are practical; others are institutional, political,
and philosophical in nature. They can be led by communities,
companies, non-governmental organizations, political parties,
governments, or civil society. Some involve new partnerships. 
15
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
For example, individuals can come together to create open data
or develop open source or citizen science interventions that
alter how digitally mediated services are delivered. Companies
can implement market-led regulation and voluntarily adopt and
promote practices such as privacy-by-design (baking individually
controlled data extraction into the product) as a means to achieve
corporate social responsibility, as well as competitive advantage.
Non-governmental organizations and foundations can produce or
facilitate privacy enhancement tools such as ad blockers, cookie
blockers and removers, malware detection and interception, site
blocking, encryption tools, and services to opt out of databases
held by data brokers. Political parties can adopt slow computing
ideas as policy proposals and push for their adoption by states.
Governments can formulate and implement policy interventions
relating to fair information practice principles, privacy-by-design,
and working hours and conditions, as well as enact new legislation
that protects people’s rights, and adopt modes of governance in
relation to its own programmes and practices that implement and
promote slow computing. Academics and civil liberties groups can
expose problematic issues and practices, and formulate and debate
an ethics of care that sets out the ideal principles for creating and
enacting slow computing.
Some communities have been actively practising slow computing
since the invention of digital technologies. Their approach
demonstrates that slow computing can be actively executed and,
depending on how deeply the values are held and enacted, can
radically change everyday life. For example, Orthodox Jews
practise the non-use of digital technologies on the Sabbath for
religious reasons. Interestingly, digital technology is also the
solution to the potential downside of observing these beliefs and
practices, with automation being used to record television shows
and phone messages for later consumption, or for automatically
turning lights on or off.32 The Amish also practise the non-use or
limited use of digital technology, partly for religious reasons, but
also to preserve cultural autonomy in the digital age.33 As Howard
Rheingold34 observes, the Amish are ‘techno-selectives’ rather than
technophobes, using digital technologies that they believe will bring
the community together and sustain Amish values or that are an
economic necessity, and avoiding those that they think will create 
16
SLOW COMPUTING
distraction from family or community time. Important here is not
just how technology is used, but a sense of how it may change the
person or community. When digital technology is used, such as
a mobile phone or laptop, it is often a shared resource and used
in a particular, limited way.35 For example, a single mobile phone
might be shared by all workers and only used for work-related calls.
You do not have to use digital technology in the narrow ways
adopted by the Amish in order to practise slow computing.
However, it does mean being techno-selective in how you use
technologies. Moreover, there are lots of moves underway that are
not bound up in religious beliefs and cultural communities but
actively enable slow computing practices, and most of them will
appreciate your support. This support can vary and can include:
active participation in creating interventions; helping to fund
open source projects; promoting the agenda or principles of slow
computing; or adopting new tools and practices in your everyday
life. Other kinds of intervention will no doubt emerge as digital
life motors on. Trying to build toward slow computing means
staying alert to these developments and taking steps with others to
lay the right foundations and then to strengthen them where or
when they are needed. The onus really is on all of us to find ways
of responding together in imaginative ways, while we still can. A
key point to make here is that the joy of computing – the speed
of access; the spreading of ideas; the sharing of information and
insights; the way we can connect with others – creates serious scope
for all of us to bounce ideas around and debate and develop new
practices and principles. It might be tempting to keep clicking or
swiping without any thought for what’s taking shape around us,
but our hope is that fewer of us will take that approach. Only via
individual and collective actions will we be able to shift gear and
create a more balanced digital society.
To be clear, then, we are not advocating for total withdrawal
or making only slow progress. As Carl Honoré, a slow movement
guru, argues, ‘Slow is about relearning the lost art of shifting gears.
… Speed is wonderful, thrilling, liberating, fun, and it can be
immensely productive.’ Like him, we are not anti-speed. We agree
that, ‘you’ve got to have a range of speeds. Like any piece of music,
you can’t have just one tempo.’ For Honoré, slowness is about ‘doing
things at the right speed – what musicians call the tempo giusto’ and 
17
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
avoiding the ‘trap of trying to do more and more things in less and
less time, putting quantity before quality in everything we do’.36
What we’re advocating for is a new way of moving and ultimately
more effort to become reflective about what the journey through
digital life entails. It is about recognizing that slow computing can
obtain real benefits for individual and societal wellbeing.
Overview of the book
So what actions are possible, what might we need to start doing
together, and what obstacles are in the way? We answer these
questions in the following chapters. We begin with the problems
and obstacles.
Chapter 2 explores the acceleration of everyday life. We highlight
what’s been happening over the last few years and explain why our
lives do seem to be speeding up, examining the transformation in
the pace, tempo, scheduling, and connections of work, home, and
social encounters. In turn, we explore the positive impacts of these
changes, such as quicker movement, on-the-fly encounters, more
efficient and timely accomplishment of tasks, and the optimization
of services, before examining some of their negative outcomes,
such as never-ending engagement, time-stress and scarcity, little
time for contemplation and deliberation, and the introduction
of more technocratic forms of governance. We note that there is
probably no way of entirely getting around acceleration while also
making use of – and finding some joy in – digital life. But striking
a balance? That’s within reach.
Our focus turns to the theme of data extraction and its
significance for slow computing in Chapter 3. We examine how
digital technologies are producing digital footprints and shadows
about our everyday lives and how these data are put to use within
multibillion dollar data brokerage and advertising industries. We
explore the apparent benefits of trading data for services and also
its dark side with respect to four key issues: privacy; difference,
profiling, and sorting; governance and politics; and production.
These issues present significant obstacles for slow computing, but
also gateways through which a more balanced digital society can
take shape.
18
SLOW COMPUTING
In Chapter 4 we identify a number of specific moves that all of
us, mostly on our own as individuals, can make to push toward
slow computing. Our attention is first on the temporal component:
on the slowing down of things. We introduce the idea of ‘time
sovereignty’, and emphasize reflection, auditing, and identifying
contingencies that provide more control over the pace and tempo
of digital life. Next, we focus on data extraction and how to manage
or evade excessive data harvesting, utilizing the concept of ‘data
sovereignty’. We outline four sets of interventions that we can all
perform to try and protect ourselves: curation, using open source
alternatives, stepping away from digital technologies, and practising
obfuscation. Even using these tactics, slow computing can be hard,
and we examine why this is the case, before finally considering how
you might go about contemplating and formulating your own slow
computing strategy and the tactics required to realize it.
Moving from the personal to the collective, Chapter 5 outlines a
wide range of practices you can participate in as you move toward a
more balanced digital life. Some of these practices are for the expert
technology user, but most of these need support from the casual user.
One trope about digital life is our apparent powerlessness against the
might of corporate giants or governments. However, we’re already
seeing moves by lawmakers in some countries to alter the terms on
which citizens are expected to lead digital lives. Collectively we
can make a difference. We examine two connected components
of collective moves to decelerate: slow computing practices and
rights, and the creation of slow computing spaces. We then
consider collective actions to evade data extraction from different
perspectives: industry-led moves; regulation by government and
policy makers; and data sovereignty expressed by communities,
civil society, and non-governmental bodies. Finally, we consider
what a slow computing world might look like.
Thinking about the future of digital life is the focus of Chapter
6, where we develop a normative argument about what our digital
society and economy should be like. Here, we try to reimagine
digital life through an ethical lens focused on care, fairness, equity,
and justice. Our aim is to provide the moral arguments for creating
and sustaining slow computing. We first set out an ethics of time
sovereignty that justifies slowing down, then an ethics of data
sovereignty that provides users with more autonomy and control 
19
LIVING DIGITAL LIVES
over their data and its uses. We explore the extent to which slow
computing can extend to all, regardless of gender, race, class, or
abilities. Do we all have the same opportunities to tackle acceleration
and data extraction?
In the final chapter, we conclude our case. Having identified
a range of personal moves and collective practices, and after
emphasizing the need for a new ethics of digital care to take shape,
we explore the creation of a more balanced digital society and some
of the persistent obstacles to implementing slow computing and
how to overcome them. The joy of slow computing is within our
grasp. It is something for all of us to work toward. But to realize
it we need to understand the issues and react to counter the forces
of acceleration and data extraction. Hopefully you will join us on
that journey.